                This is LIBERTY, a Go Program

LIBERTY is descended from Gnugo 1.2, an earlier program written
by Man Lung Li and copyrighted by the Free Software Foundation.
LIBERTY, like Gnugo 1.2 is free software issued under a slightly
amended version 2 of the General Public License (GPL) of the
Free Software Foundation which may be found in the file COPYING. 

Liberty Works with the Go Modem Protocol. You run it under
CGoban in X-Windows. It can play with itself, or any other
program implementing the Go Modem Protocol, such as the program
baduki by Lim Jaebum (also known as Artist). Baduki is based on
Xamigo, by Stoney Ballard, Neil Bowers, Todd Johnson and
perhaps others. To obtain baduki, consult:

http://soback.kornet21.net/~artist/baduk/baduki.html

Although Liberty is based on Gnugo 1.2, it is a lot stronger.
In fact, it can give Gnugo a 9 stone handicap. Liberty and
baduki are fairly evenly matched ... each wins some games. (They
are still weak, of course.)


                 Changes from CGoban

(1) Liberty uses the Go Modem Protocol instead of the

(2) The life and death modules have been rewritten. These
are in the files attacker.c and defender.c. Liberty (unlike
Gnugo) tries to read and can even read a ladder. 

(3) I have retained Gnugo's pattern matcher but I have
greatly expanded the pattern library . Whereas Gnugo knew
about 24 patterns, Liberty knows 228 patterns. Moreover
you can now add patterns very easily by editing the pattern
database patterns.db. 

                Forking the Development Tree

I have deliberately taken an existing Go program, Gnugo 1.2, and
made it different. Any Go program issued under the GPL is
guaranteed to have its descendents open sourced. Thus any strong
program issued under the GPL could be the basis for work by
other programmers.  Liberty is not a strong program, but it
could be the seed of one.

You are encouraged to distribute this program within the guidelines
of the GPL. You are encouraged to make derivative Go programs which
are different, stronger, better. Due to the stipulations of the
GPL any derivative of this work must also be under the GPL. In
practical terms, if you share the program, you must also share
the source code. This is to the good, since others can then
use your program and further enhance it.

I have added one restriction to the GPL: if you enter a program
derived from this one into any event carrying a cash prize, you
must publish your source code.

                      Instructions

Get liberty-1.0.tar.gz from http://match.stanford.edu/bump/liberty.html.

Untar the sources and build them at the command line with the
command `make'.

Obtain CGoban 1.9.2 from Bill Shubert's web site
(http://www.hevanet.com/wms/). The version number MUST be 1.9.1 at
least or it won't work.

Start CGoban from a shell under X-Windows with the command
cgoban -stealth. The shell can be an xterm or (my preference)
the Emacs shell. The diagnostics will be echoed to the
shell. Using the Emacs shell allows you to scroll through
the diagnostics for analytical purposes.

When the CGoban Control panel comes up, select Go Modem.
You will get the Go Modem Protocol Setup. Choose one (or
both) of the playsers to be ``Program,'' and fill out the
box to the path to gnugo-hack. After clicking OK, you get
the Game Setup window. Choose ``Rules Set'' to be Japanese
(otherwise handicaps won't work). Set the handicap if you
want. Click OK and you are ready to go.

                 You Can MAKE IT SHUT UP

In its default configuration, LIBERTY produces a lot of
diagnostics. These can be extremely useful but if they
annoy you, find the line:

verbose=1;  /* change this to 0 to turn off the yakkity-yak */

in main.c and change to verbose=0. Then remake.

                    Go Modem Protocol

The Go Modem Protocol was developed by Bruce Wilcox with
input from David Fotland, Anders Kierulf and others,
according to the history in the file protocol.Z, available
from ftp://igs.nuri.net/Go/programs/. Any Go program
*should* use this protocol since it is standard. (For
example the rules of the FOST Cup encourage entrants to use
this protocol.) Since CGoban supports this protocol, the
user interface for any Go program can be done entirely
through CGoban. The programmer can concentrate on the real
issues without worrying about drawing stones, resizing the
board and other distracting issues.

You can also run the original Gnugo under CGoban using the
Go Modem Protocol. Obtain the kit gnugo-gmp.tar.gz from 
http://match.stanford.edu/bump/gnugo.html to modify
Gnugo-1.2.

                      Copyrights

All modifications here to gnugo are issued under the GPL,
described in the file COPYING with the exception of the two
files gmp.c and gmp.h. These files are copyrighted by Bill
Shubert (http://www.hevanet.com/wms/), and are free for
unrestricted use. However they are not GPL'd. The file
gmp.h also contains code copyrighted by David Fotland and
Shuji Sunaga. Copyright notices may be found at the
beginning of the files. These copyrights do not restrict
either commercial or noncommercial use of the programs.

Apart from the two files gmp.c and gmp.h, I have mostly
kept my code separate from Man Li's. Copyrights for the
remaining files are with the Free Software Foundation
and myself. I claim copyright (1999) on the files
dragon.c, attacker.c, defender.c and hacks.c.

The files shapes.c, genmove.c, matchpat.c, gnugo.c, opening.c, 
sethand.c, and showbord.c are based on Man Li's original
Gnugo code, though I have made modifications to each.
The file shapes.c is based on Man Li's findpatn.c. The
file gnugo.c is an amalgamation of several of Man Li's
files. The original files on which these seven are based
are all copyrighted by the Free Software Foundation.

                       License	

Liberty is a derivative work of Gnugo 1.2 by Man Li, which is
published by the Free Software Foundation. It is substantially
changed from Gnugo and in my view it constitutes a
substantially new work.

License: Liberty is distributed under the Gnu General Public
License (GPL), amended by the following additional restriction:

    If you enter a program derived from Liberty into any
    tournament, contest or competition carrying a cash
    prize, then you are obligated to publish your source
    code as set forth under Section 3 of the GPL. I
    would recommend that you satisfy this obligation to
    publish by making the source code available on the
    World-Wide-Web.

The GPL may be found in the file COPYING.

                       Daniel Bump
                       http://match.stanford.edu/bump/go.html
                       http://match.stanford.edu/bump/gnugo.html


Aloril has added simple GTP support using code from newer GNU Go.
Also support for other sizes than 19x19 has been added.
Also disabled mkpat.
